---
title: "QuickEmu with subnet accessible Desktop VMs"
date: 2024-04-04
tags:
- QuickEmu
- QEMU
- Linux
- Guide
- Ubuntu22
- PopOS22
show_downloads: [false]
---

This guide details how to install `quickemu` on a Linux Ubuntu 22.04 server to run desktop VMs on the same subnet IPs (on a network bridge) that are remotely accessible using [SPICE](https://www.spice-space.org/).
[QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/) is a "generic and open source machine learning emulator and virtualizer" and provides a robust and flexible virtualization (and emulation) backbone, catering to a wide range of needs from development to testing across different architectures.
[QuickEmu](https://github.com/quickemu-project/quickemu) focuses on simplifying the QEMU experience, making it easier for users to create and manage virtual machines (VMs) without needing to manage most of the complexity of setup.

<h1>QuickEmu with subnet accessible Desktop VMs</h1>
<!-- Fake title mode using html -->

Revision: 20240406-1 (`init`: 20240404)

- [1. Preamble](#1-preamble)
  - [1.1. How to use this guide](#11-how-to-use-this-guide)
  - [1.2. QEMU](#12-qemu)
  - [1.3. QuickEmu](#13-quickemu)
- [2. Bridge setup](#2-bridge-setup)
- [3. QuickEmu](#3-quickemu)
  - [3.1. Installation](#31-installation)
  - [3.2. Ubuntu 22.04 Desktop on a Ubuntu 22.04 server](#32-ubuntu-2204-desktop-on-a-ubuntu-2204-server)
  - [3.3. macOS access to the VM using SPICE](#33-macos-access-to-the-vm-using-spice)
    - [3.3.1. spice client \& ssh access](#331-spice-client--ssh-access)
    - [3.3.2. aSPICE Pro (alternate spice client)](#332-aspice-pro-alternate-spice-client)
  - [3.4. PopOS VM](#34-popos-vm)
- [4. Troubleshooting](#4-troubleshooting)
  - [4.1. Running alongside Kolla-Ansible-OpenStack](#41-running-alongside-kolla-ansible-openstack)
- [5. Revision History](#5-revision-history)
  - [5.1. Contribute](#51-contribute)

This guide details how to install `quickemu` on a Linux Ubuntu 22.04 server to run desktop VMs (here we will do both Ubuntu 22.04 Desktop and PopOS 22.04 Desktop) on the same subnet IP range as the host's primary subnet using a network bridge. Those VMs are remotely accessible on the subnet using a [SPICE](https://www.spice-space.org/) client.
The setting will provide VMs that are directly accessible on the subnet where the Linux server is running. Because we will specify the MAC addresses of those VMs, we can apply reserved DHCP IPs from our router, and allow the addition and configuration of extra services within hardware firewalls, such as the [Firewalla](https://firewalla.com/) (for example: DNS-over-HTTPS).

# 1. Preamble

## 1.1. How to use this guide

Our recommendation is to obtain the source for this document from GitHub. Look at the post date (its `YYYYMMDD` `init`, not the revision), and in the repo, find it as `_posts/YYYY-MM-DD-Title.md`.
Once you have obtained the source markdown file, open it in an editor and perform a find and replace for the different values that you will need to customize for your setup. This will allow you to copy/paste directly from the source file.

Values to adjust (in no particular order):
- **`eno1`**, the network interface we will use to set up the bridge network.
- **`br0`**, the device handler for the bridge.
- **`10.0.0.17`**, the static IP (DHCP reservation) for the Linux host (Ubuntu 22.04 server)
- **`d8:9d:67:f4:4a:51`**, the MAC address of the `eno1` device (that will be cloned to the bridge)
- **`10.0.0.1`**, the router's gateway address.
- **`hostuser`**, the Linux host user.
- **`vmuser`**, the Linux VM user.

## 1.2. QEMU

[QEMU](https://www.qemu.org/) (Quick Emulator) is a free and open-source emulator and virtualizer that performs hardware virtualization.

QEMU is a highly versatile and widely used tool in the virtualization space.

- Compatibility: QEMU can run on a variety of host operating systems, including Linux, Windows, and macOS. It's capable of emulating several CPU architectures, including x86, x86_64 (AMD64/Intel 64), ARM, PowerPC, and more.
- Modes of Operation: User-mode emulation allows individual programs to run on a foreign CPU architecture. Full system emulation simulates an entire hardware system, including processor and peripherals, which can run a different operating system.
- Performance: When used on a system with the same CPU architecture as the guest OS, QEMU can utilize KVM (Kernel-based Virtual Machine) to achieve near-native performance by executing guest code directly on the host CPU via hardware virtualization extensions.

## 1.3. QuickEmu

[QuickEmu](https://github.com/quickemu-project/quickemu) serves as a frontend to simplify the usage of QEMU. 
It's designed to make it quicker and easier to create and run QEMU virtual machines. 

QuickEmu automates many of the configuration and setup processes involved in creating a VM.

- Simplified Configuration: QuickEmu uses simple configuration files to define the virtual machine's specifications, making it easier for users to set up a new VM without diving deep into the many QEMU command-line options.
- OS Detection and Setup: automatically download operating system images (Linux, Windows, and macOS) and configure them.


# 2. Bridge setup

Install the required tools

```bash
sudo apt-get install bridge-utils
```

Our installation was a server installation, where we used DHCP on one network interface to obtain a static reserved IP from our router.
As such, our `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yml` is currently:

```yaml
network:
  ethernets:
    eno1:
      dhcp4: true
  version: 2
```

`eno1` is our primary interface; it gets its reserved IP (here `10.0.0.17`) from DHCP. 
We want to create a bridge onto the same subnet so that we can specify the MAC address of the VMs we create and continue to use static reservation on our router for created VMs as well. 
Because we want our bridge interface to use the same MAC address as our `eno1` interface (so that any hardware firewall does not classify it as a new device), we will follow the method described in [https://bugs.launchpad.net/netplan/+bug/1718607](https://bugs.launchpad.net/netplan/+bug/1718607)

Our `eno1` device has MAC `d8:9d:67:f4:4a:51`.

We will create a `br0` bridge using the IP details of `eno1`. 

To do so, first, rename the `.yaml`  file `.yaml.old` to avoid it being used by `netplan`: `sudo mv /etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml{,.old}`

Now, let's create a new `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml` file with the following content:

```yaml
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd

  ethernets:
    eno1:
      match:
        macaddress: d8:9d:67:f4:4a:51
      dhcp4: false
      dhcp6: false

  bridges:
    br0:
      macaddress: d8:9d:67:f4:4a:51
      interfaces: [eno1]
      addresses: [10.0.0.17/24]
      routes:
      - to: default
        via: 10.0.0.1
        metric: 100
        on-link: true
      mtu: 1500
      nameservers:
        addresses: [8.8.8.8]
      parameters:
        stp: true
        forward-delay: 4
      dhcp4: no
      dhcp6: no
```

With this configuration, we are listing the MAC address of `eno1` and matching it in `br0`, bridging `br0` to `eno1` and using the known IP of the interface for that bridge.
We also tell the system that our gateway is `10.0.0.1` and to use Google's DNS (`8.8.8.8`) when trying to query.

To avoid `netplan` from printing a `WARNING` message when `apply`-ing the configuration, make sure to check that the file's permissions are `600` or `sudo chmod 600 /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml` 

Before `apply`-ing it, it is recommended that you have physical access to the host if you are working over SSH, as the connection might drop while the settings are updated.

Apply the configuration using

```bash
sudo netplan generate
sudo netplan --debug apply
```

After a few seconds, your prompt should be back, and you can use the `ip a` command to see that your `br0` interface was created and uses the expected IP and MAC.

To get more details about the bridge, run `sudo networkctl status br0`

# 3. QuickEmu 

## 3.1. Installation

For more details on QuickEmu and the type of VMs it supports, please see [https://github.com/quickemu-project/quickemu](https://github.com/quickemu-project/quickemu).

Install the pre-required packages for the tool to work (including `qemu`):

```bash
sudo apt install qemu bash coreutils ovmf grep jq lsb-base procps python3 genisoimage usbutils util-linux sed spice-client-gtk libtss2-tcti-swtpm0 wget xdg-user-dirs zsync unzip
```

Add the `quickemu` Ubuntu repository and install it:

```bash
sudo apt-add-repository ppa:flexiondotorg/quickemu
sudo apt update
sudo apt install quickemu
```

Next, create a --likely non-existent-- file and directory for `qemu` to be able to use the created bridge:

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /etc/qemu
echo "allow br0" | sudo tee /etc/qemu/bridge.conf
sudo chmod 755 /etc/qemu/bridge.conf
```

Also, `quickemu` needs to allow our non-admin user to use the bridge helper script. Per [those extra steps](https://github.com/quickemu-project/quickemu/issues/297#issuecomment-1013791576)

```bash
sudo chmod u+s /usr/lib/qemu/qemu-bridge-helper
```

## 3.2. Ubuntu 22.04 Desktop on a Ubuntu 22.04 server

We will use `quickget` to have the tool download the needed installer and create a default configuration file.
We will install all VM files in `~/qemu` (adapt as needed), with our user directory as `/home/hostuser`.

```bash
cd
mkdir qemu
cd qemu

quickget ubuntu 22.04
```

This provides us with a `ubuntu-22.04` directory where the different disk images (`.iso`  and `.qcow2`) will end up, and after you run the `quickemu` tool, you will have a `.sh` file with the full `qemu-system-x86_64` command.

This command also provided us with a pre-filled `ubuntu-22.04.conf` file which currently contains:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/quickemu --vm
guest_os="linux"
disk_img="ubuntu-22.04/disk.qcow2"
iso="ubuntu-22.04/ubuntu-22.04.4-desktop-amd64.iso"
```

Let's extend it to specify the number of cores (`cpu_cores`), RAM, disk size, and to have it use our `br0` network as well as specify the MAC address of the VM (`qemu` MAC addresses must start with `52:54:00`). 

Because we are using the bridge, the new VM will ask our router for an IP from its DHCP range and we can later (because we specified the MAC address) perform a static IP reservation.

Our final `ubuntu-22.04.conf` looks as follows:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/quickemu --vm
guest_os="linux"
disk_img="ubuntu-22.04/disk.qcow2"
iso="ubuntu-22.04/ubuntu-22.04.4-desktop-amd64.iso"
cpu_cores="8"
ram="16G"
disk_size="128G"
network="br0"
macaddr="52:54:00:00:01:01"
```

We reserve 8 CPU cores, 16GB of RAM, and a 128GB disk (the `qcow2` disk will increase as data is added to it), using the bridge network with a specific device MAC.

Because we are starting the VM from a server host, we will need remote access to the guest VM using a [Spice](https://www.spice-space.org/) remote desktop client.

```bash
quickemu --vm ubuntu-22.04.conf --display spice --access remote --spice-port 3001
```

The output of the command in our case was as follows (some of the values are hardware-specific and your prompt's output will match your system):

```bash
Quickemu 4.9.1 using /usr/bin/qemu-system-x86_64 v7.0.0
 - Host:     Ubuntu 22.04.4 LTS running Linux 6.5 (host)
 - CPU:       Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2697 v2 @ 2.70GHz
 - CPU VM:   2 Socket(s), 4 Core(s), 2 Thread(s), 16G RAM
 - BOOT:     EFI (Linux), OVMF (/usr/share/OVMF/OVMF_CODE.fd), SecureBoot (off).
 - Disk:     ubuntu-22.04/disk.qcow2 (128G)
             Just created, booting from ubuntu-22.04/ubuntu-22.04.4-desktop-amd64.iso
 - Boot ISO: ubuntu-22.04/ubuntu-22.04.4-desktop-amd64.iso
 - Display:  SPICE, virtio-gpu, GL (on), VirGL (off)
 - Sound:    intel-hda
 - ssh:      On host:  ssh user@localhost -p 22220
 - SPICE:    On host:  spicy --title "ubuntu-22.04" --port 3001 --spice-shared-dir /home/hostuser
 - WebDAV:   On guest: dav://localhost:9843/
 - 9P:       On guest: sudo mount -t 9p -o trans=virtio,version=9p2000.L,msize=104857600 Public-hostuser ~/hostuser
 - Network:  Bridged (br0)
 - Monitor:  On host:  nc -U "ubuntu-22.04/ubuntu-22.04-monitor.socket"
             or     :  socat -,echo=0,icanon=0 unix-connect:ubuntu-22.04/ubuntu-22.04-monitor.socket
 - Serial:   On host:  nc -U "ubuntu-22.04/ubuntu-22.04-serial.socket"
             or     :  socat -,echo=0,icanon=0 unix-connect:ubuntu-22.04/ubuntu-22.04-serial.socket
 - Process:  Starting ubuntu-22.04.conf as ubuntu-22.04 (15406)
 - Viewer:   spicy --title "ubuntu-22.04" --port "3001" --spice-shared-dir "/home/hostuser" "" >/dev/null 2>&1 &
```

The VM is now started. If you were to do a `ps auwwx` you would see a long command line defining all the parameters of the `qemu` command line.
Ours starts with `/usr/bin/qemu-system-x86_64 -name ubuntu-22.04,process=ubuntu-22.04 -pidfile ubuntu-22.04/ubuntu-22.04.pid` and is multiple lines long.

The SPICE access is on the VM host, so `10.0.0.17` using port `3001` as manually specified in the `quickemu` command line.

## 3.3. macOS access to the VM using SPICE

Please check [https://www.spice-space.org/download.html](https://www.spice-space.org/download.html) for a list of clients for different OSes.

### 3.3.1. spice client & ssh access

[`brew`](https://brew.sh/) prvides the `spicy-gtk` client for installation: `brew install spice-gtk`

Once installed you can use `spicy -h IP -p port`.

The spice port above was `3001`, and spice is running on the VM host (not the VM itself, also called the VM guest). To access it, use `spicy -h 10.0.0.17 -p 3001`

Once you can see the Ubuntu Desktop (VM guest)'s installer running on our Ubuntu server (VM host), perform the installation (you will be able to change the resolution) of your `vmuser` account.

The Ubuntu VM got its DHCP IP on our router and uses an available DHCP range IP, here `10.0.0.214`; i.e. it is on the same subnet as our other hosts and can be reached at this IP directly.
Because we know the MAC address (that we specified in the configuration file), we can use the router to specify a reserved IP for future use, as well as extra hardware-firewall-specific features.

Once the Ubuntu Desktop installation is completed, reboot and perform updates on the VM (`sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade`), then run `sudo apt install openssh-server` to install the SSH server.

Because the VM exists on the router's subnet, we can access the VM guest at its IP address directly: `ssh vmuser@10.0.0.214`.

### 3.3.2. aSPICE Pro (alternate spice client)

An alternate client (paid) for SPICE is available in the Mac App Store, named "[aSPICE Pro](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/aspice-pro-ovirt-proxmox/id1560593107)"

For the mouse pointer to work with it, per their documentation, you will need to slightly modify the startup command line:

```bash
quickemu --vm ubuntu-22.04.conf --display spice --access remote --spice-port 3001 --extra_args "-device usb-tablet,id=input0"
```

After creating a host configuration (VM guest name, VM host's IP, SPICE port and SSH access to the VM host if that is your preferred method) you will get access to the Desktop of your VM guest.

If you make a mistake or want to edit the host, you can do so by left-mouse long-pressing on the host configuration you want to edit.

## 3.4. PopOS VM

Similarly to Ubuntu Desktop, you can run other Linux distributions (as well as other OSes) by using `quickget` to obtain the installer and a default configuration file.

Depending on the OS, the command line parameters might vary, and licenses or hardware limitations might occur.

To get the VM installation file, for PopOS, we need to specify one more parameter: `quickget popos 22.04 intel`

Edit the `popos-22.04-intel.conf` file to adapt it to your preferences, see [https://github.com/quickemu-project/quickemu?tab=readme-ov-file#tuning-cpu-cores-ram—disks](https://github.com/quickemu-project/quickemu?tab=readme-ov-file#tuning-cpu-cores-ram—disks) for options.

If you are running it on the same `br0` `network`, make sure to run it on a different `macaddr` than other QEMU VMs, for example, `"52:54:00:00:01:02"`.

Finally, just start the VM using `quickemu --vm popos-22.04-intel.conf --display spice --access remote`.

When you close the VM from the Desktop, the process will terminate and you can restart it using the same `quickemu` command line.

# 4. Troubleshooting

## 4.1. Running alongside Kolla-Ansible-OpenStack

This is not recommended, but should you decide to do so, Kolla-Ansible-OpenStack (KAOS) own --and modify the owner if it gets changed-- the `/dev/kvm` device, so we need to allow our `hostuser` to use it.

```bash
# If Kolla-Ansible-OpenStack is installed, it owns the /dev/kvm device, figure out the userID
ls -ld /dev/kvm
# In our case it was 42427

# Add a new kaoshelper user so we can add ourself to its group
sudo adduser --no-create-home --uid 42427 --disabled-password --disabled-login kaoshelper

# Now the /dev/kvm group will be owned by kaos, add ourselves to that group
sudo usermod -a -G 42427 `id -un`

# logout and log back in here too, then check your user is in the right group using 
id
```

# 5. Revision History

- 20240406-1: title tweak
- 20240406-0: "user" clarifications + extended text + title change
- 20240404-0: Intitial release.
 
## 5.1. Contribute

If you see a problem or simply want to contribute, this is a GitHub-based repo, feel free to send a PR.
